sml-lib XML library                   23 May 2010


This is a library for parsing XML files. Computer scientists and
standards committees now universally regret the design of XML, since
it is insanely complicated. The FXP library is a XML parser for SML
which is also very complicated, because it inherits all of the
complexity of XML and exposes it via a fairly fancy API. It is
difficult to use because of its extreme genericity and unusual SML
style, although ironically it bakes in a few annoying assumptions
(such as that the XML it is parsing is always on disk). So, if you
want to live XML, this is your thing. If like most computer scientists
you just want to open up an XML file and enjoy programming, then
you should use sml-lib's wrappers.

For sml-lib I defined a very simple datatype for XML, then give you a
function that parses a file on disk or string in memory into this data
structure. You don't get the stream parsing stuff, you don't get DTD
verification or support for weird encodings, or external entity
definitions, but you probably don't want that stuff. On the plus side,
you get pretty decent support for XML (including support for local
entities and CDATA and other weird stuff) and you won't even feel the
urge to shoot yourself once. Enjoy!

I have made some local modifications to FXP to support this.
  - I completely disabled remote URIs. These were only supported via
    shell commands to wget, and required system-specific configuration,
    which is a pain.
  - I modified the Uri implementation and decodeFile to support
    in-memory XML documents via the new and non-standard "raw-data:<data>"
    URI.

(PS. Despite the headaches, thanks to the FXP authors for all their
useful work on FXP!)


Note 27 Mar 2014: I think that this library may have trouble parsing
files that are larger than 4GB, even in 64 bit mode? A cursory look
doesn't give any clues, though.
